Title: Autism: Parental Partner Intimacy
Author: Bailey McNab
Tags: Autism, Parental well-being, intimacy, communication, socialization
Date: June 2, 2017
Status: published

Partner intimacy and socialization seem to have decreased for parents who have children with ASD. Parents who have children with ASD can experience higher rates of depression, social isolation, added stress, and anxiety (Hock, Timm, and Ramisch, 2012). Recent studies show that parents who have children with ASD experience these more than they experience an increased appreciation or understanding or life, more compassion and patience, and a stronger social network. In a qualitative study performed by Hock, Timm, and Ramisch, (2012), researchers attempted to find information about partner intimacy when ASD is present in the home. Ten families participated in the study they performed. The ages of the participants ranged anywhere between 37 and 60 years old with an average age of 48 years old. The age of the children with ASD that participated in the study was anywhere between 2 and 29 years old with an average of 12.2 years. Each child and parent had a biological relationship. There were 18 of the participants that identified as white and only one identified as Asian/Pacific Islander. There were many significant results in this particular study. First, ASD was identified as a crucible, or a test of the couple’s relationship. Most couples described a period of time immediately following the diagnosis in which they experienced immense stress. The diagnosis puts a strain on the partners’ resources. Partners were feeling fatigue, emotional exhaustion, and a depletion of energy and time. 

In this study, partners also described that it was difficult to make decisions and an extreme lack of communication in between partners during this time period. Parents found themselves unable to attend community locations such as church, to other friends’ houses, and to the grocery store. Many parents in this study described that their relationship was to the point of breaking, but they stayed together because of the commitment to their child and their identity as parents. Once parents made it through this ASD crucible phase, they move on to either tag team or deeper intimacy. When partners use the tag team method, they reported just switching responsibilities throughout the day. One parent described the tag team effort as, “. . . you just see your partner as the tag-team partner, where the sole interaction is, okay, your turn, now you’re on, I’m off, you’re on, I’m off.” Partners in this phase reported feeling as though they could not tend to their relationship and they would become angry and critical about each other when things went wrong. Lastly, when partners moved into the deeper intimacy phase, they often did so because they were unhappy with where the tag-team phase left them. Another reason partners moved into the deeper intimacy phase was when they believed that their marital relationship was beneficial for their children. Partners in this study stated that when they entered this phase, they felt a renewed commitment with their partner. During this phase, partners relied on friends, family, and church members to provide child care and respite for the couple. These changes helped marital relationships as it helped them cope from the stress, and encouraged intimacy and commitment to each other and their family.

> Hock, R. M., Timm, T. M., & Ramisch, J. L. (2012). Parenting children with autism 	spectrum disorders: a crucible for couple relationships. Child & Family Social 	Work, 17(4), 406-415. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2206.2011.00794.x
