Author: Bailey McNab
Title: Parenting Styles, Family Functioning, and Parental Stress in Parents of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
Date: 4/1/17
Tags: Autism, Children, Essays
Status: draft

Many complication can occur in regards to the development of children. There can physical disabilities and development delays. Some of those disabilities and delays can be detected in the prenatal stages of life. Others are more difficult to detect, such as Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). ASD can be detected through the developmental track of individual children. Some of the signs and symptoms of ASD are atypical social skills, lack of speech and eye contact, sensory sensitivity, and self-regulatory issue. Children with ASD need early intervention depending on where they land on the spectrum (if they are low functioning or high functioning). Early intervention programs and activities may include speech therapy, occupational therapy, and behavioral therapy, depending on how functioning the child is and what kind of symptoms he or she is experiencing. Some of these therapies can be just a few hours to as many as twenty hours a week. Parents and/or caregivers can attend with their child, and some can just drop the child off at the therapy office. Either way, parents and caregivers need to be incredibly involved and invested in their child’s future. Having a child with ASD can be costly, financially and emotionally. This paper will address the question: Does ASD have an effect on family function and parental anxiety. ASD does have an impact on the parenting styles, family functioning, and parental stress. First, this paper will discuss some of the background of ASD such as how it is detected and the two main researchers of ASD. The following sections will discuss research performed on families in respects to daily life and how it is different and challenging for parents who have children with ASD. Lastly, this paper will be putting forth recommendations to parents of children with ASD based on the research presented.

# Background

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) was first diagnosed as a form of schizophrenia (Vatanoglu-Lutz, Ataman, & Bicer, 2014). However, studies have found that this disorder is biologically based. Leo Kanner and Hans Asperger were the two well-known physicians and researchers that set the milestones for diagnosing ASD. Today, ASD is in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM). The definition of ASD in the DSM has changed over the years. Autistic symptoms may include lack of social interaction, lack of communication skills and language, lack of eye contact, and emotional regulatory challenges. Children may also show signs of autism if they are committing repetitive activities, becoming withdrawn, or acting out in aggression or destruction (Vatanoglu-Lutz, Ataman, & Bicer, 2014). Any of these symptoms can usually be detected around the late toddler-hood or early preschool ages.

Now, the ASD definition states that ASD is a spectrum reaching from low-functioning (severe) autism to high-functioning autism. Low-functioning autism is when the person experiences very low social skills, little to no speech, and low-functioning in their daily life. These are children who may need an aid or caregiver with them on a daily basis. High-functioning autistic children exhibit some exhibits of autism, but it may not be particularly hinder the daily life of that child.

# Demands of Autism

ASD can be a very demanding neurological disorder. The more low-functioning a child is, the more demanding their needs are. The more high-functioning a child is, the less demanding their needs are. Children who have autism need early intervention. This may include speech therapy, occupational therapy, or behavioral therapy. Depending on where the child lands on the spectrum, they may have more or less demanding needs. Either way, a child with ASD needs early intervention to help ease the behaviors. Early intervention programs can be time consuming and costly. ASD itself also requires much patience and determination from the parents. It takes times to discover what methods are the most effective for handling the child’s behaviors. All in all, ASD can be extremely demanding for families.

# Family Functioning

Parents of children with ASD have reported a decrease in family functioning (Jellet, Wood, Giallo, and Seymour, 2015). During the child’s preschool years families may feel like they are in crisis because their child’s diagnosis is rather recent and their child’s behavior is most likely at the most extreme point in their lives. Behaviors such as aggression and destruction are common and difficult for the family to manage. Not only were the emotional outbursts difficult, but so was the ability to communicate with one another. In a qualitative study performed by Rachel Jellet, Catherine Wood, Rebecca Giallo, and Monique Seymour in 2015, ninety-seven parents in Australia were given a questionnaire to complete. The answers to these question defined the stress level of the parent and the family functioning level. The study helped to define a correlation between the level of a child’s behavioral challenges and family functioning. The worse the behaviors seemed to get, the poorer the family functioning.

## Parenting Styles 

Parental styles can also affect the way parents can become involved effectively. The three different styles of parenting we will be examining are authoritative, authoritarian, and permissive parenting. Authoritative parenting is when the parents contain warmth, but are also firm within their boundaries in reference to rules and authority. Authoritarian parenting involves parents who display much coldness to their children and are also very firm about authority. Lastly, permissive parenting is when the parents allow their children the freedom to have their own experiences without authority.

It is important to understand that parenting styles and behaviors are closely associated with behavioral challenges in children with ASD. A study performed by Mohammadi and Zarafshan (2014) indicated that there were differences in parenting styles that were closely associated with the behavior in children with ASD. There are three basic parenting style discussed in Mohammadi’s and Zarafshan’s study: authoritative, authoritarian, and permissive. Authoritarian and authoritative parents of children with ASD had a decreased behavioral challenges and increased pro-social behavior. Parents who were permissive had children that had a increase in behavioral challenges and a decrease in pro-social behavior as well as high impulsivity and aggression. (Mohammadi and Zarafshan 2014).

# Parental Anxiety

Many children with ASD need early intervention to ease the symptoms. Those who bring the children to therapies, cope through the tantrums, and deal with the stress and anxiety are the parents and caregivers. Parents of children with ASD often spend hours in waiting rooms, in meetings with teachers and therapists, and alone with the child. Other than therapy and school, children with ASD may not even leave their parents’ sight. This can create much angst, anxiety, and stress in the parents.

Parents have also reported that the need to predict their child’s activities were constantly a strain, and they reported being physically and emotionally exhausted (Mount and Dillon, 2014). In a study conducted by Mount and Dillon in 2014, nine parents or children with ASD were asked to complete individual interviews about their child.

There were seven themes about parental anxiety laid out in the interviews produced by the Mount and Dillon study. These themes included difficulties faced by parents, effects on relationships, impact upon self, diagnosis and support, school issues, the future, and coping strategies. Parents’ coping strategies included active avoidance, religious coping, problem-focused strategies, and positive coping (Twoy, Connolly, & Novak, 2007; Hastings, Kovshoff, Brown, Ward, Degli Espinosa, & Remington, 2005). Attempts to provide parents with support has decreased whereas intervention for children has increased. Parents had concerns about their futures as well as their child’s future. They also addressed concerns about academic issues such as homework, relationships with teachers and other children, and communication. The parents reported that the diagnosis of ASD was followed by grief, shock, and, lack of advice. The impact on the parents were feelings of tiredness, frustration, guilt and uncertainty. And lastly, difficulties faced by parents included repetitive, delayed outburst and eve food-related behaviors (Mount and Dillon, 2014). These seven themes are very closely linked to parental anxiety.   

The ability to communicate with children with ASD can also be difficult, which can cause stress in parenthood. A qualitative study was performed in South Africa that helped outline the difficulties parents were having when communicating with their child with ASD (Alli, Abdoola, & Mupawose, 2015). All nine participants expressed concerns about communication with their children. There were reports of articulation differences, non-verbal communication skills (sign language) that were too difficult for the parents to understand, and one parent reported that their child had the inability to speak. Situations like these can be frustrating for parents as it is difficult to know what the child is asking for or needs. Seven of the nine participants said that they had not learned a coping mechanism to achieve communication. The other two had tried using pictures to communicate with the child, but it was difficult and limited in a natural setting. This linguistic block can lead to stress in parenting and increased emotional tantrums in the children with ASD (Alli, 2015).

# Recommendations

Knowledge is key. According to a study described by Baojin Ding in 2015, parents feel more calm after having some autism education. This study provided early intervention for parents who had children with ASD. It was conducted in two phases; Phase 1 was the portion where parents endured a training module developed by psychiatrists, social workers, psychologists, and more. Phase 2 was a questionnaire used to evaluate the stress in parents after the training module. Parents reported to have decreased stress and contained more knowledge about autism (Ding, 2015).

It is highly recommended that parents need to take a break from the entire scene for a while. Programs such as Respit care, childcare provided by the family’s health care provider, provide services to help parents get a break. Respit care will pay for caregivers to come into the family’s home while the parents can take a break. This opportunity is important for husbands and wives to reconnect with one another and relax. Respit care should not be used so parents can take time to restore the house or complete work because that is not the objective. The objective of Respit care is to decrease parental stress which is supposed to positively effect family functioning. In other words, it indirectly effects the child in a positive way. Other early intervention programs for parents can include therapy, parental support groups, and classes or seminars about children with ASD.

Autism Spectrum Disorder can have a huge impact on many families. The disorder can effect parenting styles, family functioning, and parental stress. These three factors need to have a positive impact on the children with ASD. The child affected will thrive if the conditions are in a positive cycle. If not, it is important to recognize that there are different methods to creating a positive environment for the children with ASD.

### References
>Alli, A., Abdoola, S., & Mupawose, A. (2015). Parents' journey into the world of 	autism. South African Journal of Child Health, 9(3), 81-84. 	doi:10.7196/SAJCH.7942

>Bader, S., & Barry, T. (2014). A longitudinal examination of the relation between 	parental expressed emotion and externalizing behaviors in children and adolescents 	with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism & Developmental 	Disorders, 44(11), 2820-2831. doi:10.1007/s10803-014-2142-6

>Ding, B. (2015). How to assist parents of children with autism spectrum disorders in rural 	area? Journal of Neurosciences in Rural Practice, 6(4), 465-466. 	doi:10.4103/0976-3147.169776

>Ekas, N. V., & Whitman, T. L. 1. (2011). Adaptation to daily stress among mothers of 	children with an autism spectrum disorder: The role of daily positive affect. Journal 	of Autism & Developmental Disorders, 41(9), 1202-1213. 	doi:10.1007/s10803-010-1142-4

>Haven, E. L., Manangan, C. N., Sparrow, J. K., & Wilson, B. J. (2014). The relation of 	parent-child interaction qualities to social skills in children with and without autism 	spectrum disorders. Autism: The International Journal of Research and 	Practice, 18(3), 292-300. Retrieved from http://libaccess.sjlibrary.org

>Hastings, R.P., Kovshoff, H., Brown, T., Ward, N.J., Degli Espinosa, F. & Remington, B. 	(2005). Coping strategies in mothers and fathers of preschool and school-age 	children with autism. Autism, 9(4), 377–391.

>Jellett, R., Wood, C. E., Giallo, R., & Seymour, M. (2015). Family functioning and 	behaviour problems in children with autism spectrum disorders: The mediating role 	of parent mental health. Clinical Psychologist, 19(1), 39-48. doi:10.1111/cp.12047

>Mohammadi, M., & Zarafshan, H. (2014). Family function, parenting style and broader 	autism phenotype as predicting factors of psychological adjustment in typically 	developing siblings of children with autism spectrum disorders. Iranian Journal of 	Psychiatry, 9(2), 55-63. Retrieved from http://libaccess.sjlibrary.org

>Mount, N., & Dillon, G. (2014). Parents' experiences of living with an adolescent 	diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder. Educational & Child Psychology, 31(4), 	72-81. Retrieved from http://libaccess.sjlibrary.org

>Patra, S., Arun, P., & Chavan, B. S. (2015). Impact of psychoeducation intervention 	module on parents of children with autism spectrum disorders: A preliminary 	study. Journal of Neurosciences in Rural Practice, 6(4), 529-535. 	doi:10.4103/0976-3147.165422

>Twoy, R., Connolly, P.M. & Novak, J.M. (2007). Coping strategies used by parents of 		children with autism. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 19(5), 	251–260

>Vatanoglu- Lutz, E., Ataman, A. D., & Bicer, S. (2014). Medicine in stamps: History of 	autism spectrum disorder (ASD) through philately. Journal of Neurological 	Sciences, 31(2), 426-434. Retrieved from http://libaccess.sjlibrary.org

>Zhou, T., & Yi, C. (2014). Parenting styles and parents' perspectives on how their own 	emotions affect the functioning of children with autism spectrum disorders. Family 	Process, 53(1), 67-79. doi:10.1111/famp.12058

>[Click here to edit](https://github.com/betsythefc/blog.imnotat.work/blob/master/CHAD/parenting-styles-family-functioning-and-parental-stress-in-parents-of-children-with-autism-spectrum-disorder.md)
>[Click here to edit](https://github.com/betsythefc/blog.imnotat.work/tree/master/CHAD/parenting-styles-family-functioning-and-parental-stress-in-parents-of-children-with-autism-spectrum-disorder.md
>[Click here to edit](https://github.com/betsythefc/blog.imnotat.work/tree/master/CHAD/parenting-styles-family-functioning-and-parental-stress-in-parents-of-children-with-autism-spectrum-disorder.md
>[Click here to edit](https://github.com/betsythefc/blog.imnotat.work/tree/master/CHAD/parenting-styles-family-functioning-and-parental-stress-in-parents-of-children-with-autism-spectrum-disorder.md)
>[Click here to edit](https://github.com/betsythefc/blog.imnotat.work/tree/master/CHAD/parenting-styles-family-functioning-and-parental-stress-in-parents-of-children-with-autism-spectrum-disorder.md)
>[Click here to edit](https://github.com/betsythefc/blog.imnotat.work/tree/master/CHAD/parenting-styles-family-functioning-and-parental-stress-in-parents-of-children-with-autism-spectrum-disorder.md)
