Author: Bailey McNab
Title: The Importance of Play in the Four Domains of Development (Part 1 of 2)
Date: 3/23/17
Status: draft

Research has shown that play has become increasingly important in early education. The amount of play in preschools and infant and toddler programs has decreased as the necessity for play in these programs have increased. Children learn through play, and it is extremely important for all domains of development: physical, emotional, social, and cognitive (Winerman, 2009). In this portion of the series, we will be discussing play in two of the domains of development: cognitive/language and physical.

# Background

It has been difficult to clearly define play in its true form. Play has four main characteristics: flexibility, nonliterality, positive affect, and the use of intrinsic motivation (Lillard, Lerner, Hopkins, Dore, Smith, & Palmquist, 2012). Flexibility means that play can happen anywhere at anytime. Nonliterality is when play becomes pretend. Objects often have different uses, or “behaviors lack their usual meaning,” (Lillard et. al., 2015, p 2). Positive affect is shown when the child is smiling or laughing while playing and they are experiencing a positive activity. Lastly, play is recognized when intrinsic motivation, which is otherwise referred to as volunteerism of a certain activity, is used.  

# Cognitive/Language Development

Cognitive development refers to the development of the brain and cognitive functions. Children develop cognitively when they learn language, problem solving skills, and creativity (Lillard, Lerner, Hopkins, Dore, Smith, & Palmquist, 2012). There are many different play-based behaviors that can be associated with cognitive development. We will be examining how problem solving, and language development can be facilitated through play and how distractions can limit cognitive development.

## Problem Solving

When one thinks about problem solving, they are usually thinking about math. There is very little research on toddlers and their ability to comprehend mathematical concepts. One study that was found, investigated how play can facilitate the development of mathematical skills (Reikeras, Loge, & Knivsberg, 2012). In this study, children were presented with tasks categorized into three areas of math: numbers and counting, geometry, and logical reasoning. These tasks were made of play-based activities such as cleaning up toys, drawing, doing puzzles, and playing a game where children fetch two or more objects. Simple activities such as the ones just listed have a tremendous effect on the development of problem solving during cognitive development. This study suggests that using play to problem solve can have a positive ongoing effect of the school-aged child (Reikeras, Loge, & Knivsberg, 2012).

## Language

Orr and Geva (2015) state that language development and pretend play are closely interrelated. Pretend play involves children creating mental images of objects or events and the language coincides with the mental representations. Pretend play may also include more than one child. In this scenario, children are talking while pretending, and learning from one another. In Orr and Geva’s (2015) study, they examined infants in a play-based setting. They concluded that when infants were playing with audible toys (such as rattles) and babbling, these actions preceded speech which began around 12 months of age (Orr & Geva, 2015).

Orr and Geva (2015) also make an argument that babbling may not lead to language, but it may lead to the motor activity involved in speaking. They state that the materials and events around the child are what assists directly with language development; this includes symbolic play. There are three hypotheses that contain information about how language is related to the play of one, two, or three objects. The first is the “Direct-Path Hypothesis”. This is the belief that babbling and single-object play lead to speech. The “Indirect-Path Hypothesis” states that babbling helps with speech and that speech leads to all kinds of play. The last hypothesis is the “Dual-Path Hypothesis” which states that babbling leads to speech, but that speech leads to the play of multiple objects instead of just one object (Orr & Geva, 2015). These three hypotheses are to be considered while studying infants and toddlers as they begin to hit the milestones of language development.

## Distraction’s effect on play

Research has shown that distraction has a negative effect on toddlers’ ability to develop cognitively. A study conducted by Wyss, Kannass,and Haden (2013) investigated whether or not toddlers were affected by distractions. Two groups of toddlers were placed in two different learning environments: one room with distractions and another without distractions. The study concluded that the toddlers who were presented with a person moving within their peripheral vision, had a difficult time concentrating on the given tasks. The researchers gave each child eight tasks that were in different categories of learning: problem solving, categorization, memory, and free play (Wyss, Kannass,and Haden, 2013). In general, during the free-play task, toddlers were much more attentive. In the “Distraction room”, there was a positive correlation between the distractions and lowered quality of task performance (Wyss, Kannass,and Haden, 2013). This research is important because it shows that children who are presented with distractions (most commonly with technology) have a lowered attention span on  even the most playful activities. Some people may think that play contains much free play, when in reality it can be structured and quiet activities that lead to the development of cognition. 

# Physical Development

Physical development of young children can be divided into two types: fine motor development and gross motor development. Fine motor development is the development of small muscle groups. Activities that are helpful for fine motor development are writing, playing with mold-able material, and working with snaps, buttons, or zippers. Gross motor development is the development of large muscle groups. Activities that are helpful for gross motor development are running, climbing, and jumping. It may seem easier to create activities of play for the physical domain. Games such as tag, chase, or hide and seek are all very common and popular games that facilitate physical development. However, the physical domain can require more than just running or writing. It is important and simple to incorporate play within the parameters of the physical domain. Almost any activity will require fine and gross motor skills.

Not only do educators and parents need to make sure there is physical activities for the infants and toddlers to do that are developmentally appropriate, but infants and toddlers also need to be eating well in order to achieve their physical development (Deiner & Wei, 2007). Children need to be growing, but as they grow, they need a balanced and healthy diet. This will help children fight obesity, have better mood levels, and are more likely to succeed cognitively and socially. 
