Title: Autism: Career Disruption in Parents
Author: Bailey McNab
Tags: Autism, Career Disruption, Parental Well-being, CHAD
Date: 5/29/2017
Status: published

Career disruption is one of the outcomes of a child becoming diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). In a study performed by Stoner, J. and Stoner, C. (2016), out of 326 families, 60% of the mothers stated that they could not continue back to work because of the needs of the child with ASD . Those who remained employed had a reduction of work hours, turned down promotion opportunities, or took leaves of absences to care for the child. In this study, eight married couples were interviewed. When a child receives this diagnosis, they are often drawn into multiple forms of intervention. This can often cause the parents to experience career disruption. This is usually the time in which one or both parents need to resign or back off from a current job to attend to their child. This study was a qualitative study that included eight married couples, or 16 individuals. The information was gathered through interviews of these individuals included the stresses of the career disruption process, the impact of career disruption, and the transition of life meaning and personal significance. 

The career disruption process starts with attempting obtaining an ASD diagnosis on the basis of comparing developmental progress of their child and other children. Parents finding themselves going to one professional over another can be financially and emotionally draining. Finally receiving the diagnosis was relieving for some families, but for others, the stress seemed to add on as parents continued to feel emotional. The career disruption process continues with services. Stoner, J. and Stoner, C. (2016) address the fact that getting the services for their children with ASD can also be extremely challenging. For example, parents begin with educating themselves, then seek out therapies and investigate different schools. Parents reported to have a sense of urgency or panic during this time. Lastly, the career disruption process ends with the career decision. Every couple in the study had a career prior to the birth of the child who has ASD. Parents in the study reported that they tried to have both parents continue to be involved in their professional career, but only one family was able to maintain that. The decision for one parent to leave their professional career was extremely difficult as there were many factors to consider such as finances, health care benefits, flexibility, and consistency of employment. It is important to identify the significance in all of the families that participated in the study, all of the parents involuntary switched their role from wage-earner to primary caregiver. In all of the families, the spouse that made the most money and had a consistent stream of income became the primary wage-earner while the other became the primary caregiver for the child with ASD. The loss of a career can be both financially and emotionally impacted. The services required the primary caregiver to be present for a good portion of the time as they are the ones to make appointments and attend them which required full-time attention. The sense of grief was felt by both parents as they were both forced to redefine their roles.

Parents also felt the sense of isolation, loneliness, and underutilization. The parent who experienced the disruption in career reported to feel supported by their working partner. They also felt that extended family was a huge support system for them. The primary caregivers faced a transition of personal significance in this time. They learned a newer, more professional language as they needed to be speaking with professionals about their child. These parents needed to learn how to navigate through the special education process and environment. They reported to having immersed themselves in gathering information and becoming their child’s advocate for them. This study’s results are significant because even though a child with ASD can affect all members of the family, the results show that the presence of a child with ASD can affect the primary caregiving parent profoundly (Stoner, J. and Stoner, C., 2016). Not only can career disruption hinder the parenting partnership, but sleep can also be extremely impacted when ASD is present in the home. 

> Stoner, J. B., & Stoner, C. R. (2016). Career Disruption. Focus On Autism & Other 	Developmental Disabilities, 31(2), 104-114. doi:10.1177/1088357614528798
